
Development of a Centralised Web-Based School Administration System

A REPORT SUBMITTED TO MANCHESTER METROPOLITAN
UNIVERSITY FOR THE DEGREE OF BACHELOR OF
SCIENCE
IN THE FACULTY OF SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING





2026

By Ismail Patel
Department of Computing and Mathematics




Abstract
This project addresses the technological disparity faced by small scale educational institutions, which often lack the resources to implement enterprise level Management Information Systems (MIS). The study details the design, implementation, and evaluation of a centralised, web-based School Administration System using the MERN stack (MongoDB, Express.js, React, Node.js). Adopting a hybrid software development methodology, the project successfully delivers a functional Minimum Viable Product (MVP) capable of handling student enrolment, course scheduling, and academic grading. Critical evaluation using the System Usability Scale (SUS) demonstrates that bespoke, lightweight web applications can offer a viable, cost-effective alternative to disjointed legacy systems, effectively resoling the data silos problem.


Declaration
No part of this project has been submitted in support if an application for any other degree or qualification at this or any other institute of learning. Apart from those parts of the project containing citations to the work of others, this project is my own unaided work. This work has been carried out in accordance with the Manchester Metropolitan University research ethics procedures, and has received ethical approval number [EthOS Number].
Signed……. Ismail Patel……….


Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my professor [NAME] for all the support they have provided, they did a incredible job guiding me through the completion of my project. I would also like to thank all the participants who took my survey and helped me collect data.


Introduction
1.1 Project Background
Administrative processes are fundamental to the effective running of any educational institution. Tasks such as maintaining student records, recording attendance, managing course information, and tracking academic progress all depend on information being accurate, accessible, and easy to update. Where these processes are managed well, staff are better able to work efficiently and make informed decisions. Where they are managed poorly, duplication, inconsistency, and delay can become routine.
The wider educational sector has seen substantial growth in the use of digital technology, not only in teaching and learning but also in system management and institutional administration (UNESCO, 2023). However, access to well-designed digital systems is not always consistent across educational settings. While larger institutions may be able to adopt comprehensive enterprise platforms, smaller schools, tuition centres, training providers, and similar organisations may instead rely on a mixture of spreadsheets, paper files, email chains, and separate digital tools. Although these approaches may be workable on a small scale, they often become inefficient and difficult to manage as the volume of administrative data increases.
This fragmented way of working creates several practical problems. The same information may be recorded in multiple places, increasing the likelihood of duplication and inconsistency. Staff may need to re-enter data, cross-check records manually, or move between disconnected tools to build a complete picture of a student's details, attendance, or performance. The scale of this risk should not be underestimated, as a systematic literature review spanning over 35 years of research found that 94% of business spreadsheets contain critical errors (Poon et al., 2024). This does not only reduce efficiency; it also affects reliability and visibility. Research on student and education management information systems suggests that factors such as system quality, information quality, and service quality have a direct effect on user satisfaction and successful use of such systems (Gürkut and Nat, 2018; Martins et al., 2019). This makes the quality of the underlying administrative platform an important issue rather than a purely technical preference.
The problem is also significant from a professional and ethical perspective. School administration systems process personal and academic information, and in many cases this concerns children or young people. As a result, privacy, access control, and responsible data handling are central design concerns rather than optional add-ons (Information Commissioner's Office, 2023). In addition, because the proposed solution is web-based, it should be designed with accessibility and security in mind. Current guidance such as WCAG 2.2 emphasises the need to make web content more accessible to a wide range of users, while OWASP identifies broken access control and related weaknesses as among the most critical risks affecting web applications today (W3C, 2024; OWASP Foundation, 2025).
This project responds to these issues through the development of a centralised web-based school administration system. The system is intended as a proof-of-concept minimum viable product (MVP) that brings together core administrative functions in a single application. Instead of relying on separate tools for student details, attendance, courses, and grades, the project explores whether these functions can be managed more effectively through one integrated platform. The purpose is not to reproduce every feature of a commercial school management product, but to investigate whether a focused and well-designed web application can provide a practical response to the inefficiencies created by fragmented administrative processes.
From a software engineering perspective, the project provides a realistic opportunity to investigate a real organisational problem through full-stack system development. It involves requirements analysis, database design, authentication, interface design, implementation, testing, and evaluation. It also requires consideration of wider professional issues, including data protection, usability, security, accessibility, and Equality, Diversity and Inclusion (EDI). For this reason, the dissertation takes a proof-by-construction approach: rather than discussing the problem only in abstract terms, it develops and evaluates a working software artefact in order to assess the feasibility and usefulness of the proposed solution.

1.2 Aim and Objectives
1.2.1 Aim
The aim of this project is to design, implement, and evaluate a secure centralised web-based school administration system that supports the management of core administrative data through a single integrated platform.
1.2.2 Objectives
To achieve this aim, the project has the following objectives:
To investigate the practical problems associated with fragmented school administration, including duplicated records, inefficient workflows, and poor data visibility (addressed in Chapter 2).
To review relevant literature, existing systems, and software engineering principles in order to establish the context for the project and justify the proposed solution (addressed in Chapter 2).
To define the functional and non-functional requirements for a minimum viable product focused on core administrative tasks (addressed in Chapter 3.
To design an appropriate system architecture, database structure, and user interface for the proposed application (addressed in Chapter 3).
To implement a working full-stack web application that supports secure login and the management of students, courses, attendance, and grades (addressed in Chapter 4).
To test the implemented system to assess whether the required functionality works correctly and reliably (addressed in Chapter 5).
To evaluate the usability and practical value of the system through structured feedback and critical reflection on the extent to which the project aim has been achieved (addressed in Chapter 5).
1.2.3 Research Question
This dissertation is guided by the following research question:
To what extent can a web-based school administration system, developed as a proof-of-concept MVP, demonstrate feasibility and usability as a solution to fragmented administrative processes in smaller educational settings?
1.3 Scope and Boundaries
As this project is being completed within the constraints of an individual final-year dissertation, it is necessary to define clear boundaries. The system is therefore developed as an MVP rather than a full institutional platform. The purpose of the project is to create and evaluate a focused administrative core, not to replicate the full range of features found in large commercial school management systems.
The current implementation is centred on the Administrator role. This means the system is designed primarily to support the creation, maintenance, and management of student records, course information, attendance data, and grades from an administrative perspective. This boundary has been chosen deliberately to
keep the project achievable while still addressing the main problem identified in the background discussion. Although teachers, students, and parents would be relevant stakeholders in a broader real-world system, they are outside the scope of the present implementation.
For the same reason, several features commonly associated with larger educational platforms are not included in this version of the system. These include parent and student portals, messaging tools, timetabling, payment processing, mobile-native applications, and advanced analytics. Their exclusion is a matter of scope control rather than a judgement on their value. The intention is to establish a solid administrative foundation that could be extended in future work.
The project is also limited by the timeframe and resources available for development. As a result, the system is evaluated primarily as a prototype and proof of concept. It is intended to demonstrate sound design decisions, functional correctness, and practical usefulness, rather than full enterprise readiness or large-scale deployment.
1.4 Development Approach
The project adopts a hybrid development approach combining incremental development with iterative prototyping. This approach is appropriate for an individual software engineering project with a fixed submission deadline. A fully sequential approach would provide structure, but it would offer less flexibility when refining the interface and responding to issues discovered during development. A fully agile team-based process would also be less suitable given the scale and context of the project. A hybrid model provides a practical balance between control and adaptability.
The system is developed incrementally by building the main functional areas in stages. Core features such as authentication, student management, course management, attendance, and grade handling can therefore be implemented and tested as distinct parts of the system. At the same time, the user interface is refined iteratively through prototyping, allowing layout, navigation, and usability decisions to improve as development progresses.
This approach supports both the technical and investigative aims of the dissertation. It makes it possible to manage the development process in a structured way while still allowing the system to evolve in response to technical findings and evaluation feedback. The project is therefore treated not simply as a coding task, but as a software engineering investigation into whether the proposed solution is viable in practice.
1.5 Dissertation Structure
The remainder of this dissertation is organised as follows.
Chapter 2 presents the literature review. It examines the wider problem of fragmented educational administration, reviews related systems and relevant research, and establishes the theoretical, technical, and professional context for the project.
Chapter 3 sets out the system requirements and design. It identifies the functions the system must support and explains the design decisions taken in relation to architecture, database structure, interface planning, and security.
Chapter 4 discusses the implementation of the system. It explains how the software artefact was developed, the technologies used, and the main technical challenges encountered during construction.
Chapter 5 presents the testing and evaluation of the finished system. It reports on the methods used to verify functionality and assess usability, before critically discussing the extent to which the project objectives were met.
Chapter 6 concludes the dissertation by reflecting on the overall outcome of the project, considering its limitations, and identifying areas for future development.
Taken together, these chapters examine whether a focused web-based administration system can provide a credible and practical response to the inefficiencies caused by fragmented school administration processes.


Figure 1:Gantt Chart illustrating the 15-week development timeline.


Chapter 2: Literature Review
2.1 Overview and Literature Search Strategy
This chapter examines the academic, technical and commercial landscape surrounding educational administration systems, with the aim of establishing a well-grounded context for the project. To ensure the review was thorough and reproducible, a structured search methodology was adopted, drawing on academic databases including IEEE Xplore, Google Scholar and the ACM Digital Library. These sources were selected because they provide broad coverage across both software engineering and educational technology research. Boolean search strings were constructed using terms such as “Educational Technology,” “Single Page Applications” and “Information System Security” following guidance on conducting systematic literature searches in computing research. (Kitchenham, 2004).
Where recent papers referenced older foundational work, citation mining was used to trace these back to their original sources, ensuring that key theoretical frameworks are engaged with directly rather than through secondary accounts (Webster and Watson, 2002). This was particularly important for areas such as software architecture and security, where seminal contributions remain highly relevant despite their age.
The review is structured to move from the broader operational context of educational technology, through a critical evaluation of existing tools and solutions, and into the specific technical and methodological decisions underpinning the proposed system. Ethical considerations including data protection, participant consent, equity of access and information security are addressed throughout rather than treated as a separate concern, reflecting the view that these issues are integral to sound system design.
2.2 Domain Analysis: The Operational Context
2.2.1 The Digital Divide in Educational Technology
The modern educational sector is characterised by an “information explosion” placing increasing demands on institutions to maintain robust digital infrastructure for managing administrative operations (Al-Emran et al.,2018). While the adoption of Educational Technology (EdTech) accelerated considerably following the global shift to remote learning during the COVID-19 pandemic (Hodges et al.,2020), this growth has not been uniform. Research indicated that private tutoring centres, vocational colleges, and independent language schools are frequently priced out of enterprise-level solutions due to financial constraints and a lack of dedicated IT staff (Peltier et al., 2012). Selwyn (2020) observes that such institutions often resort to “bricolage” assembling mismatched digital and physical tools to manage daily operations. This fragmented approach introduces signigifcant administrative
friction and, as the following sections examine, creates compounding technical and legal problems that a centralised system is well positioned to address.

Figure 2:Comparison of fragmented legacy systems versus a centralised database architecture.
2.2.2 The "Data Silo" Architecture and Interoperability Failures
The direct technical consequence of the bricolage approach is the creation of data silos. Laudon and Laudon (2020) define these as isolated repositories of data that remain inaccessible to other parts of an organisation. This isolation is driven by schema incompatibility and a lack of Application Programming Interface (API) interoperability between systems (Hasselbring, 2000). For instance, a student record stored within a finance spreadsheet operates on a fundamentally different data structure to the same student's entry in a physical attendance logbook. Without a unified backend architecture, a modification in one system does not propagate to the others, directly violating the database principle of referential integrity and causing records to become desynchronised over time. This degradation of data quality represents not only an operational problem but, as Section 2.2.6 discusses, a potential breach of data protection obligations.
2.2.3 The Prevalence and Risk of "Shadow IT"
A critical finding within the literature of organisational management is the widespread reliance on "Shadow IT," defined as systems and software used without explicit organisational approval or oversight (Rentrop and Zimmermann, 2012). In small educational settings, this predominantly manifests as the use of Microsoft Excel for complex relational data tasks. While spreadsheets offer initial flexibility, they are notoriously error-prone when repurposed as makeshift databases. A systematic review spanning over 35 years of research found that 94% of business spreadsheets examined contained critical errors (Poon et al., 2024), a finding consistent with broader evidence of persistently high error rates in environments lacking version control (Silic and Back, 2014). Unlike a dedicated Database Management System (DBMS) that enforces ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) transactions, a spreadsheet has no internal constraints. A user can inadvertently delete a student from an enrolment tab while leaving their grades orphaned in another, creating exactly the kind of data integrity failures described in Section 2.2.2. These risks raise the question of whether existing off-the-shelf solutions adequately address the needs of smaller institutions, which is examined in the following section.
2.2.4 Critical Evaluation of Existing Market Solutions
A critical evaluation of off-the-shelf solutions is necessary to establish whether the development of a bespoke system is genuinely warranted. The industry standard for UK state schools is Capita SIMS, a comprehensive Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system. SIMS traditionally operates as a legacy thick-client Windows application, creating a significant barrier to remote access that typically requires complex Virtual Private Network (VPN) configurations. The Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) for such systems frequently exceeds £20,000 per annum (Educause, 2022), making it financially unviable for smaller independent institutions. Beyond cost, Markus et al. (2000) note that schools using proprietary ERPs often experience vendor lock-in, whereby closed data formats make migration away from the platform extremely difficult, effectively trapping institutional data assets within a single supplier's ecosystem.
Smaller institutions often attempt to address this by repurposing Learning Management Systems (LMS) such as Moodle or Blackboard. While these platforms are well suited to the delivery of educational content, the literature identifies a fundamental conflation between an LMS and a Student Information System (SIS) (Weaver et al., 2008). Moodle does not natively support statutory census reporting, financial invoicing, or staff HR management. Attempts to introduce these functions through third-party plugins frequently introduce instability and technical debt. Table 2.1 summarises this comparative analysis, illustrating the gap in the market that the proposed lightweight system aims to address.

Feature
Enterprise ERP (SIMS)
LMS (Moodle)
Spreadsheets (Excel)
Proposed System (MERN)
Primary Focus
Administration
Pedagogy
Calculation
Administration
Cost
High (£20k+)
Low (Open Source)
Low (License included)
Low (PaaS Free Tier)
Data Integrity
High (SQL)
Medium (Plugins)
Low (No Validation)
High (Mongoose Schemas)
Accessibility
Low (VPN/Desktop)
High (Web)
Medium (File Share)
High (Responsive Web)
Compliance
High (GDPR)
Medium
Low (No Audit Trail)
High (Centralised)
IP/License
Closed/Proprietary
Open Source (GPL)
Proprietary
Open Source (MIT)
Table 1:Comparative analysis of existing solutions against proposed artifact.

2.2.5 Cognitive Load, EDI, and Public Well-being
Software development must consider Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion (EDI) alongside broader societal impacts such as public well-being. The usability of educational software is frequently cited as a critical failure point in this regard. Sweller's (1988) Cognitive Load Theory posits that human working memory is strictly limited, and that interfaces cluttered with irrelevant options increase extraneous cognitive load, leaving users with reduced mental capacity for their primary tasks. This is a well-documented criticism of legacy ERP systems and provides a clear rationale for prioritising a minimalist, user-centric interface in line with established Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) heuristics (Norman, 1988; Nielsen, 1993). Reducing this kind of digital friction has practical well-being implications, as research links poorly designed administrative software to increased technostress and burnout among teaching and support staff (Tarafdar et al., 2007).
Accessibility is equally important from an EDI perspective. Compliance with the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG 2.2) ensures the system remains usable by staff with visual or motor impairments (W3C, 2024). Delivering the solution as a responsive web application further supports equity of access, as staff are not required to use expensive or high-specification hardware, making the system practically viable across a range of socio-economic contexts.
2.2.6 Legal Frameworks: GDPR, Data Privacy, and Participant Consent
The storage of sensitive student data introduces significant legal and ethical obligations, governed in the United Kingdom by the UK General Data Protection Regulation (UK GDPR). A primary concern is the management of participant consent under Article 7, which requires that educational institutions capture and maintain explicit, freely given consent for data processing, particularly where minors are involved (Tikkinen-Piri et al., 2018). Ad-hoc manual systems and physical paper files frequently result in consent records that are lost, incomplete, or untraceable, creating an immediate compliance risk.
A centralised digital system addresses this directly by ensuring consent is recorded systematically, in line with the principles of Privacy by Design (Cavoukian, 2009). Article 5 of the UK GDPR further requires that records remain accurate, while Article 17 establishes the right to erasure (Hoepman, 2014). In a fragmented, siloed environment, fulfilling a deletion request across multiple disconnected systems and physical files is operationally impractical. A single centralised database resolves this by allowing all records associated with an individual to be located and removed through a single operation. These legal requirements have direct implications for the technical architecture of the proposed system, which are explored in the following section.
2.3 Technical Review: Web Application Architectures
2.3.1 Data Processing Models and the MVC Architectural Pattern
Modern web applications rely on established architectural patterns to manage complexity and maintain a clear separation of concerns. The Model-View-Controller (MVC) pattern, originally theorised by Reenskaug (1979) and later adapted for enterprise application development by Fowler (2003), remains widely adopted as a structural foundation for full-stack systems. Within the context of the MERN stack used in this project, the pattern is distributed across the technology layers. MongoDB fulfils the Model role by representing the underlying data structures, React handles the View layer by managing user interface logic, and Express.js acts as the Controller by processing HTTP requests, validating inputs, and routing business logic. This separation ensures that changes to the interface do not inadvertently affect database operations, a vulnerability commonly observed in older, tightly coupled architectures (Fowler, 2003). Whilst MVC is not without criticism, particularly regarding the risk of bloated controllers in larger applications, it remains well suited to a project of this scope and provides a clear organisational framework for development.
2.3.2 Architectural Paradigms: Monolithic versus Single Page Applications
The evolution of web delivery has seen a notable shift from Multi-Page Applications (MPAs) to Single Page Applications (SPAs). Traditional frameworks such as PHP-based Laravel operate on a monolithic MPA model, where the server fully renders a new HTML document for every user interaction. Whilst this approach is simpler to implement initially (Otwell, 2021), it introduces continuous network latency, commonly referred to as page blink, and places greater load on the server. Fielding (2000), in his seminal work on network architectures, argues that tightly coupling the user interface to the server inherently limits scalability.
The SPA model addresses these limitations by loading a single HTML shell on the initial request, with subsequent interactions handled dynamically by JavaScript updating the Document Object Model (DOM) through asynchronous API calls (Mesbah and van Deursen, 2007). Mikowski and Taivalsaari (2013) indicate that SPAs reduce network payload sizes significantly after the initial load, though it is worth noting that this initial load can itself be slower than an equivalent MPA. For an administrative dashboard requiring rapid and repetitive data entry, the desktop-like responsiveness of the SPA model outweighs this drawback, and is expected to improve efficiency and user satisfaction as measured by standardised metrics such as the System Usability Scale (Brooke, 1996).
2.3.3 Frontend Engineering and Component-Based Architecture
A comparative evaluation of leading SPA frameworks was conducted to determine the most appropriate choice for this project. Table 2.2 summarises the three frameworks currently dominating the industry across key criteria relevant to this system.


Framework
Architecture
Learning Curve
Typing
Community/Popularity
Angular
MVC (Opinionated)
Steep
Strongly Typed (TS)
High (Enterprise)
Vue.js
Component-Based
Gentle
Optional
Medium (Growing)
React.js
Component-Based
Moderate
Optional (JSX/TSX)
Very High (Industry Standard)
Table 2:Comparison of modern frontend JavaScript frameworks.
React was selected based on its adherence to Component-Based Software Engineering (CBSE) principles. Szyperski (2002) and Sommerville (2016) argue that CBSE enhances maintainability by encapsulating complex logic into isolated, reusable units, which is particularly valuable in a system with multiple distinct administrative views. React also avoids the performance bottlenecks of direct DOM manipulation by using a Virtual DOM algorithm, whereby state differences are calculated in memory and only the affected elements are re-rendered (Gackenheimer and Mardan, 2015). This makes it well suited to rendering the large, dynamic data tables central to a school administration system. Whilst React carries a steeper initial learning curve than Vue.js, and is arguably more complex than strictly necessary for smaller projects, its extensive community support and component model make it the most appropriate choice given the scale and ambitions of this system.
2.3.4 Server-Side Runtime Environments: Thread-Based versus Event-Driven
The choice of server-side runtime has significant implications for how a web application handles concurrent user traffic. Traditional environments such as Java and PHP operate on a thread-based model, spawning a new operating system thread for each incoming HTTP request. Whilst this approach is effective for CPU-intensive computation, it incurs considerable memory overhead and is prone to thread-blocking when processes are waiting for database queries to resolve (Goetz et al., 2006).
Node.js offers an alternative through its event-driven, single-threaded, non-blocking Event Loop architecture (Tilkov and Vinoski, 2010). Rather than waiting for an I/O operation to complete, Node.js offloads the task and continues processing other requests, returning to execute a callback only once the database has responded (Casciaro, 2014). Research by Chitra and Satapathy (2017) demonstrated that Node.js achieves significantly higher throughput than Java in I/O-bound applications. It should be noted that Node.js is less suitable for applications requiring heavy CPU computation, as long-running synchronous tasks can block the event loop entirely. However, given that a school administration system spends the majority of its execution time reading and writing records rather than performing intensive calculations, this limitation is not a concern in this context, and Node.js represents a well-justified choice for the server-side runtime.

Figure 3:Comparative throughput of Node.js (Event Loop) versus Apache (Thread-based) under high load.
2.3.5 Database Strategy: The CAP Theorem and NoSQL
The choice of database technology requires careful consideration of the trade-offs involved. The CAP Theorem provides a useful analytical lens here, stating that a distributed data store can only simultaneously guarantee two of three properties: Consistency, Availability, and Partition Tolerance (Brewer, 2012). Relational SQL databases such as MySQL prioritise strict ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) consistency through rigid, tabular schemas. Whilst this offers strong data integrity guarantees, SQL databases suffer from the Object-Relational Impedance Mismatch, which refers to the inherent difficulty of translating object-oriented programming structures into flat relational tables (Date, 2004). Schema migrations in SQL are also complex and time-consuming, which can significantly slow iterative development.
MongoDB addresses these concerns by storing data as flexible BSON documents. As Kleppmann (2017) notes, JSON-native document stores eliminate the impedance mismatch by mapping directly to the JavaScript objects used throughout the Node.js and React layers of the MERN stack, accelerating development and simplifying data modelling as requirements evolve (Boicea et al., 2012; Han et al., 2011). It should be acknowledged that MongoDB's default configuration sacrifices strict ACID compliance in favour of availability, which introduces a degree of risk when handling sensitive student records. This risk is mitigated in the proposed system through the use of Mongoose ODM, which enforces schema validation and data integrity constraints at the application layer, as discussed further in Section 2.3.6.
2.3.6 Security Architecture: Application Hardening and the CIA Triad
Security is a non-negotiable consideration in any system handling personal data, and particularly so where the data subjects include minors. The security architecture of the proposed system is framed around the CIA Triad: Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability (Pfleeger and Pfleeger, 2006), with specific reference to vulnerabilities catalogued by the Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP, 2021).
Confidentiality requires that data is accessible only to authorised personnel. To achieve this, the system uses stateless JSON Web Tokens (JWT) in place of traditional session cookies, combined with Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) middleware to prevent broken access control, identified as the foremost risk in the OWASP Top 10. Passwords are protected through cryptographic hashing using Bcrypt, mitigating the risk of credential theft.
Integrity requires that data remains accurate and protected from tampering. Mongoose ODM is used to validate and sanitise all incoming network payloads before they reach the database, neutralising NoSQL injection vectors (Tajpour et al., 2011). React's JSX syntax provides a further layer of protection by automatically escaping embedded data, guarding against Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) attacks (Johns et al., 2008). The system also addresses the OWASP API Security Top 10 (OWASP, 2023), which identifies broken object-level authorisation and excessive data exposure as the most significant risks in API-based systems.
Availability is supported through cloud deployment, which reduces the risk of localised service disruption, and through application logging that provides an auditable trail of administrative actions. Together these measures establish a layered security posture appropriate for a system of this nature.
2.3.7 Cloud Deployment Models and Sustainable IT
Selecting an appropriate deployment infrastructure is an important architectural decision. The National Institute of Standards and Technology distinguishes between several cloud service models (Mell and Grance, 2011), of which Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) and Platform as a Service (PaaS) are most relevant here. Whilst IaaS solutions such as raw AWS EC2 instances offer maximum configurability, they require considerable time investment in manual operating system patching and security hardening. A PaaS model is therefore more appropriate for this project, as it abstracts the server management layer and allows development effort to remain focused on application logic rather than infrastructure maintenance.
Beyond practical considerations, the choice of deployment model also carries environmental implications worth acknowledging. Moving away from energy-inefficient on-premise school servers towards multi-tenant cloud infrastructure reduces overall energy consumption, as cloud providers are able to optimise server utilisation across many concurrent users (Garg and Buyya, 2012). This aligns the project with broader Green Computing principles, which advocate for reduced energy waste in IT infrastructure (Murugesan, 2008), and reflects the wider expectation that software development should consider its environmental impact alongside its technical objectives. This concern for responsible development extends to the use of third-party code and open-source dependencies, which is addressed in the following section.
2.3.8 Intellectual Property and Open Source Ethics
The use of third-party libraries and frameworks raises important questions around intellectual property that are worth addressing explicitly. Open-source software is governed by a variety of licence types that impose different obligations on developers. The MIT Licence, under which both React and Express.js are distributed, is a permissive licence that allows free use, modification, and distribution provided that the original copyright notice is retained (Laurent, 2004). This makes it well suited to academic and commercial projects alike, and its use here does not raise any intellectual property concerns.
Whilst leveraging established open-source frameworks avoids the need to rebuild well-solved problems from scratch, it is important to maintain a clear distinction between these dependencies and the original contributions of the project. All bespoke business logic, API routing, database schemas, and interface designs in this system constitute original work. Any third-party code or components drawn upon are acknowledged within the source code and bibliography, in line with good professional practice. This transparency reflects the broader principle that responsible software development requires clear accounting of all dependencies, both for ethical and maintainability reasons. With the technical and professional context now established, the following section considers the methodological approach taken to manage the development process.
2.4 Methodological Review
2.4.1 Traditional Software Development Life Cycles
The Waterfall model, originally formalised by Royce (1970), prescribes a rigid, sequential progression through the phases of requirements gathering, design, implementation, and testing. Whilst this structured approach offers clarity and is well suited to projects where requirements are stable and well understood from the outset, Sommerville (2016) argues that its insistence on Big Design Up Front makes it fundamentally ill-suited to contexts where requirements are liable to evolve. In the context of an individual student project with a fixed submission deadline, this limitation is particularly significant. A misunderstanding in the requirements phase during the early weeks of the project may remain undetected until the testing phase, at which point there is insufficient time to address it. This brittleness in the face of changing requirements provides a clear rationale for considering more flexible alternatives, as discussed in the following section.
2.4.2 Agile Methodologies and their Limitations
In response to the rigidities of the Waterfall model, Agile methodologies emerged as a more flexible alternative, prioritising iterative delivery, customer collaboration, and responsiveness to change (Beck et al., 2001). The Scrum framework in particular has become widely adopted as an industry standard for software development teams. In collaborative, cross-functional team settings, Scrum's emphasis on short sprints and continuous feedback has been shown to improve both delivery speed and product quality. However, Schwaber and Sutherland (2020) note that Scrum is explicitly designed for teams rather than individual developers. The administrative overhead associated with mandatory ceremonies such as daily stand-ups, sprint planning sessions, and retrospectives can become counterproductive in a solo development context. Kniberg (2015) observes that applying strict team-based Agile processes to a single developer frequently results in process fatigue, undermining the very efficiency gains that Agile is intended to deliver. Recognising both the strengths of iterative thinking and the practical limitations of pure Scrum in this context, a hybrid approach was adopted, as justified in the following section.
2.4.3 Justification for the Hybrid Development Methodology
Recognising the limitations of both Waterfall and pure Agile in this context, a hybrid methodology was adopted, drawing on iterative frameworks including the Rational Unified Process (Kruchten, 2003) and the blended approaches theorised by Boehm and Turner (2003). The backend architecture, encompassing the database design and API layer, is developed incrementally. This borrows the structural discipline of Waterfall to ensure that the foundational security protocols and data integrity layers are stable and thoroughly tested before any frontend interface is built on top of them. Given the sensitive nature of the data the system handles, this sequencing was considered essential rather than optional.
The frontend user interface is developed through iterative prototyping, reflecting the understanding that interface design is inherently a process of discovery. Wireframes are converted into working code, evaluated against usability heuristics, and refined through successive cycles. This dual approach aligns with the Lean Startup philosophy described by Ries (2011), which advocates for the rapid delivery of a functional minimum viable product within tight constraints. Together these two tracks allow the project to maintain structural rigour where it matters most whilst retaining the flexibility needed to respond to findings that emerge during development. The implications of this approach for testing strategy are considered in the following section.

Figure 4:The proposed Hybrid Methodology combining incremental structure with iterative prototyping.
2.4.4 Software Testing Paradigms and Quality Assurance
Ensuring the reliability of the final artefact requires a clearly defined testing strategy (Myers et al., 2011). Strict Test-Driven Development (TDD), in which tests are written before application code, offers a high level of software verification and encourages cleaner architectural decisions. However, the discipline required by TDD presents a significant learning overhead that can disrupt development timelines in a time-constrained individual project. An automated unit testing strategy using the Jest framework was therefore adopted as a more balanced alternative. Tests are written concurrently with critical business logic, including cryptographic password hashing and grade aggregation, to verify that core system behaviour remains correct as the codebase evolves. Whilst this approach does not offer the same comprehensive coverage as full TDD, it provides a meaningful safety net for the most risk-sensitive parts of the system without imposing a prohibitive overhead. The limitations of this testing strategy, and their implications for the reliability of the final artefact, are considered further in the evaluation chapter. With both the technical and methodological context now established, the following section synthesises these findings into a coherent justification for the proposed system.
2.5 Synthesis: Conceptualising the Solution
The literature reviewed in this chapter points consistently towards a clear gap in the market. Smaller educational institutions are poorly served by the current landscape of available solutions. Enterprise ERP systems such as Capita SIMS are financially inaccessible and introduce vendor lock-in, whilst Learning Management Systems lack the administrative functionality these institutions require. The ad-hoc reliance on spreadsheets and fragmented manual processes that fills this void creates data integrity failures, accessibility barriers, and significant GDPR compliance risks, as examined across Sections 2.2.2 through 2.2.6.
The proposed system responds to these findings through a bespoke, lightweight school administration system built on the MERN stack. The technical choices examined in Section 2.3 are each justified by the specific demands of this context. React's component-based architecture supports a maintainable and accessible interface, Node.js provides the I/O performance required for a responsive administrative dashboard, and MongoDB offers the schema flexibility necessary for iterative development. Security is addressed through the layered CIA Triad approach outlined in Section 2.3.6, ensuring the system handles sensitive student data responsibly from the ground up.
Taken together, these findings provide a coherent technical and professional foundation for the system. The requirements identified through this review will be prioritised in the following chapter using the MoSCoW methodology, translating the problems identified in the literature into a concrete and measurable feature set.
Chapter 3: Requirement and Design
3.1 Introduction
This chapter translated the theoretical context established in Chapter 2 into a concrete technical specification. It covers the elicitation and prioritisation of system requirements, the design of the database schema and system architecture, and the planned approach to security and interface design. Together these decisions form the foundation upon which the implementation described in Chapter 4 was built.
3.2 Requirement Analysis and Elicitation
In professional software engineering practice, requirements elicitation is the process of identifying and documenting what a system must do and the constraints under which it must operate (Sommerville, 2016). As this project addresses a broad sector-wide problem rather than a single client brief, requirements could not be gathered through direct stakeholder interviews stakeholder interviews in the traditional sense. Instead, they were derived through three stakeholder interviews in the traditional sense. These requirements were derived from three complementary sources. Initially, a critical analysis of existing systems in Section 2.2.4 identified specific administrative functions that current tools fail to deliver. Furthermore, the literature provided evidence of broader operational problems, such as data fragmentation, GDPR non-compliance, and the lack of affordable alternatives to enterprise ERPs. Finally, a structured reflection on dissertation constraints ensured that the scope remained limited to a testable MVP achievable within the fixed deadline.
The primary user persona developed for this system is the school administrator, a non-technical staff member with responsibility for maintaining student records, managing course enrolments, recording attendance, and overseeing academic performance data. A secondary user role is the teacher, who requires access to academic data entry functions but should ot have authority over institutional records such as user accounts or the audit trial. These two roles, and the boundary between them, directly informed the access control design described in  Section 3.7
3.2.1 Functional Requirements
To ensure a functional MVP could be delivered within the constraints of the academic submission deadline, all elicited requirements were subjected to prioritisation using the MoSCoW method, which categorises features as Must Have, Should Have, Could Have, or Won’t Have (Clegg and Barker, 1994). This technique ensures that development effort is concentrate on the most critical functionality first, providing a defensible basis for any features that are deferred or excluded from the current version.
Priority
System Requirement
Justification
Must Have
Secure JWT-based user authentication
Without authentication no endpoint is safe to expose and all other features depend on this.
Must Have
Student record management restricted to administrators
Core administrative function identified in Section 2.2.2 as the primary institutional need
Must Have
Course management with teacher assignment
Required for attendance and grade recording to carry ant relational meaning
Must Have
Attendance recording per student per sessions
Addresses the statutory monitoring requirement identifies in the domain analysis
Must Have
Grade entry by administrators and teachers with automatic percentage and letter grade calculation
Core academic data management function ensures that teacher submitted grades update the central record immediately without manual reconciliation
Must Have
Role-Based Access Control with administrator and teacher roles
Required to enforce the principle of least privilege and prevent unauthorised data access
Must Have
GDPR consent flag and consent date on student records
Legal obligation under UK GDPR Article 7 and a Privacy by Design requirement per Section 2.2.6
Should Have
Audit logging of all write operations with IP address capture
Best practice for systems handling personal data that supports accountability and post-incident review
Should Have
Paginated and searchable student list
Necessary for usability at any realistic institutional scale
Should Have
Dashboard with aggregated statistics and data visualisations
Provides operational visibility and supports data driven decision making
Should Have
Teacher module view with course material upload functionality
Reduces reliance on external file sharing tools and consolidates course content within the authenticated system
Should Have
Announcement management system
Reduces administrative reliance on external communication tools
Could Have
At risk student identification based on attendance and grade thresholds
Adds analytical value but is not a core data management function
Could Have
Student facing personal dashboard
Useful for engagement but outside the primary administrative scope of this version
Could Have
Timetable View
Useful for scheduling context but not required for core data integrity
Won’t Have
Parent or guardian portal
Reserved for future development and outside current scope
Won’t Have
Payment or invoicing processing
Outside the scope of the MVP
Won’t Have
Mobile-native application
A responsive web application addresses mobile access without the overhead of a separate codebase
Table 3.1: MoSCoW prioritisation of system requirements

3.3 Functional Requirements
The functional requirements define the specific behaviours the system must be capable of executing, expressed as user stories to maintain a user-centric development focus.
An administrator must be able to log in securely using an email address and password, whereupon the system issues a JSON Web Token that the client attaches to all subsequent requests. Any protected endpoint must reject requests that do not carry a valid token.
An administrator must be able to create, view, update and delete student records. When creating a record, the system must require the student identifier, full name, email address, date of birth, gender, and data consent status. Student records must be retrievable through a paginated list that supports case-insensitive partial matching across the student identifier, first name, last name and email fields simultaneously.
An administrator must be able to create and manage course records, assigning each course to a teacher account and enrolling students. The system must prevent duplicate course codes from being entered. An administrator or teacher must be able to record daily attendance for each student on a given course using one of four statuses, those being present, absent, late or excused. The system must prevent duplicate attendance records from being created for the same student, course and date combination.
An administrator or teacher must be able to record grades for individual assessments, specifying the assessment name, type, raw score, and maximum possible score. The system must automatically calculate the percentage score and assign a letter grade without requiring manual input from the user. Grades entered by teachers must be written to the same central grade collection that administrators view, ensuring a single source of truth for academic performance data across the institution.
A teacher must be able to access a dedicated module view for each course to which they are assigned. Withing this view, the teacher must be able to upload course materials including documents, slides, PDFs and must be ablet o view and manage grades for students enrolled on that course. The teacher must not be able to access or modify materials or grades for courses they are not assigned to.
All write operations performed by any authenticated user must be logged to an audit trial that records the action type, the identity of the performing user, the affected record, a plain language description and the originating IP address.

3.4 Non-Functional Requirements
Non-functional requirements define the quality, security and operational constraints of the system. These were formulated in alignment with the ISO/IEC 25010 standard for software product quality (ISO,2018), which provides a structured framework for specifying measurable software quality characteristics.
Regarding security, all passwords must be hashed using a computationally expensive one-way function before storage, and no password may be stored in recoverable plaintext. All API endpoints, except for the login route, must reject requests that do not carry a valid JWT in the authorisation header. The login endpoint must be rate-limited to a maximum of ten requests per fifteen-minute window to mitigate brute force attacks. All incoming request bodies must be validated and sanitised before any database interaction occurs. File uploads submitted by teachers must be restricted by file type and size to prevent abuse of the upload endpoint,
With regard to performance, the dashboard page must retrieve and render its aggregated statistics within three seconds under a standard broadband connection. Paginated list endpoints must return responses within two seconds for collections of up to one thousand records.
About usability and accessibility, the system must be fully operable on any modern web browser without requiring additional software installation. The interface must remain functional and navigable on-screen width down to 768 pixels to support tablet access. All interactive elements must carry sufficient colour contrast to meet WCAG 2.2 Level AA requirements (W3C,2024), ensuring the system is accessible to staff with visual impairments.
With regard to reliability, the system must handle unexpected errors gracefully, returning a structured JSON error response rather than exposing server stack traces or crashing the process. All database operations must be wrapped in error handling to prevent individual failures from affecting unrelated requests.
3.5 Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC)
As established in Section 2.4.3 this project adopts a hybrid development methodology combining an incremental approach for the backend with iterative prototyping for the front end. In practice, the database schema and API layer were designed and stabilised first, with authentication, validation and security controls tested before any frontend code was connected to them.
This sequencing reflects the principle that the API constitutes the primary trust boundary of the system. Establishing sound validation and authentication at the server layer before attaching any frontend interface ensures that data integrity is not contingent on the behaviour of the client. A frontend application can always be replaces or bypassed, whereas the server-side controls cannot be circumvented in the same way. Once the API was stable the frontend was developed through successive prototyping cycles, with each page refined in response to usability observations during development testing. This dual track approach allowed architectural decisions to be made deliberately rather than reactively, whilst retaining the flexibility that interface design inherently requires.
A fifteen-week project timeline was established at the outset, with key milestones including the completion of the server architecture and authentication system by Week 4, core CRUD operations by Week 7, front end development including the teacher module view by Week 11, testing by Week 13, and evaluation and write-up though to Week 15. This schedule is illustrated in the Gantt chart presented as Figure 1.1 in Chapter 1.
3.6 System Architecture
The system is built on three-tier architecture using the MERN stack (MongoDB, Express.js, React.js, Node,js), selected for the reasons established in Sections 2.3.3 through 2.3.5. The three tiers map naturally onto the Model-View-Controller pattern described in Section 2.3.1.
The presentation layer is a React single-page application running entirely withing the user’s browser. It is responsible solely for rendering the interface and issuing asynchronous HTTP requests to the server. It holds no business logic and performs no database queries directly.
The application layer is an Express.js server running on Node.js. It handles all request routing, input validation, authentication verification, role-based access control business logic execution, file upload handling and error handling. This layer is the only component permitted to interact with the database, ensuring that all data access passes through the validation and security controls defined at this level,
The data layer is MongoDB database accessed through the Mongoose ODM. Mongoose enforces strict schema-level validation on all documents before they are written, providing a second line of defence against malformed data that supplements the validation applied at the route level.
Communication between the presentation and application layer follows a RESTful architectural style (Fielding,2000). When a user action requires data, the React client constructs an synchronous HTTP request to the appropriate API endpoint, attaching the stores JWT in the authorisation header. The express server validates the token, executes the requested operation and returns a JSON response. The React client then updates the relevant portion of the interface without triggering a full page reload, providing the responsive, desktop-like experience described in Section 2.3.2.
Access control is enforced at both layers independently. On the frontend, a ProtectedRoute component wraps each page and checks the current user’s role before rendering. If the user does not hold the appropriate role, they are redirected to their designated home view. On the backend, an authorise middleware function accepts a list of permitted roles for each route and returns a 403 Forbidden response if the authenticated user’s role is not included. This dual enforcement means that even if the client-side redirect were somehow bypassed, the API would still reject any unauthorised request independently.
3.7 Database Design
MongoDB stores data as documents within collections. Whilst MongoDB is schema flexible by default, all collections in this system are governed by strict schemas defined through the Mongoose ODM. Mongoose validates incoming data against the schema definition before any write operation reaches the database, enforcing data types, field lengths, regex patterns and enumerated value constraints at the application layer.
The data model consists of six primary collections alongside four supporting collections for announcements, notifications, evaluations and course materials. The six primary collections and their relationships are illustrated in the entity relationship diagram below.

The User collection stores system accounts for administrators, teachers and students. Each document holds the user’s name, email address, a Bcrypt-hashed password, a role field constrained to the values admin, teacher, or student, an isActive Boolean flag, and a lastLogin timestamp updated on each successful authentication. Within the schema definition, the password field is configured with the select option set to false, meaning it is excluded from all query results by default and must be explicitly requested. This prevents the password hash from being accidentally included in any API response regardless of how a query is written.
The Student collection holds a personal and academic information for enrolled learners. Key fields include a unique student identifier, personal contact details, an array of ObjectId references to enrolled Course documents and an enrolement status enumerated as active, inactive, graduated or suspended. Two GSPR-specific fields are included, those being a Boolean dataConsentGiven flag and a consentDate timestamp that is populated automatically when consent is recorded. Two virtual properties are defined. The fullNmae virtual concatenates the first and last name fields, and the age virtual is calculated dynamically from the date of birth. A composite text index is applied across the firstName, lastName, email and studentID fields to support the case-insensitive search functionality required by the Must Have requirements.
The Course collection stores each course’s code, name, description, credit value and a schedule sub-document containing the day of week, start and end times and room. Each course documents holds a reference to the assigned teacher User and an array of references to enrolled students documents. A virtual studentCount property calculates the current enrolment figure on demand without requiring an additional database query.
The Grade collection records individual assessment results. Each document references the student and course it belongs to, the user who entered the grade, the assessment name, type, raw score, maximum possible score and an optional feedback field, Grades are entered by teachers and grades entered by administrators are stored in the same collection, ensuring a single authoritative source of academic performance data across the system. Two virtual properties provide derived values. The percentage virtual expresses the result as a rounded integer and the letterGrade virtual maps the percentage to a letter band using the algorithm described in Section 3.8.
The Attendance collection records one document per student per class session. Each document references the student, course, the user who marked the register and the date alongside a status field enumerated as present, absent, late or excused. A compound unique index is applied across the course, student and date fields. This index enforces at the database level that no duplicate attendance record can be created for the same combination, which is a category of data integrity failure common in manual systems where the same session might be recorded twice by different users or administrative staff.
The Material collection stores course resources uploaded by teachers. Each document references the course it belongs to and the teacher who uploaded it, alongside the original file name, the server-side file path, the file type and an upload timestamp. Access to materials is scoped to the course level, meaning a teacher can only upload to and retrieve materials for courses they are assigned to. Administrators retain system-wide visibility over all uploaded materials. This scoping is enforced at the route level through middleare that compared the authenticated user’s identity against the teacher field on the relevant Course document before permitting any material operation.
The Audit Log collection records a timestamped entry for every write operation performed across the system. Each document captures the action type, the ObjectId of the performing user, the affected collection and document identifier, a plain-language description and the IP address and user agent string extracted from the originating HTTP request. No route in the system permits editing or deletion of audit entries, making the log append-only by design and supporting the accountability and post-incident review requirements established in Section 3.3.
3.8 Algorithmic Design
The grade calculation logic produces two derived values from the raw score and maximum score entered by the user. These are implemented as Mongoose virtual properties, meaning they are computed when a document is serialised to JSON and do not require additional database storage or a separate calculation step in the application layer.
The percentage is computed as follows:
FUNCTION calculatePercentage(score, maxScore):
RETURN ROUND((score /maxScore) * 100)
END FUNCTION
The letter grade is determined by applying a sequential threshold comparison to the calculated percentage:
FUNCTION assignLetterGrade(percentage):
IF percentage >= 90 THEN RETURN “A+”
ELSE IF percentage >= 80 THEN RETURN “A”
ELSE IF percentage >= 70 THEN RETURN “B”
ELSE IF percentage >= 60 THEN RETURN “C”
ELSE IF percentage >= 50 THEN RETURN “D”
ELSE RETURN “F”
END IF
END FUCNTION
Encapsulating this logic within the Mongoose schema definition it is independent of any specific API route or front end component. Any part of the application that serialises a Grade document will receive these calculated values automatically, eliminating the risk of inconsistent grade display that would arise from duplicated calculation logic in separate parts of the codebase. This is particularly important given that both teachers and administrators can enter grades through different interfaces, yet both sets of entries must produce identical derived values.

3.9 Use Case Design
The use case diagram below defines the system boundary and the interactions permitted for each actor role.

Three actor roles interact with the system. The Administrator role has unrestricted access to all system functions, including the creation and deactivation of user accounts, full student and course record management. Attendance and grade entry, announcement management, system-wide visibility over all uploaded course materials and access to the audit log. The Teacher role may view student and course information, record attendance, enter and review grades for their assigned courses, and upload course materials to those same courses. The Teacher role may not create or delete student records, access the user management interface, view the audit trail or interact with courses they are not assigned to. The Student role has a read only view of personal grades, attendance history, the timetable, the announcement feed and cannot access any other student’s data.
These boundaries are enforced in the backend by the authorise middleware, which accepts an array of permitted roles and returns 403 forbidden response  if the authenticated user’s role is not included. The material upload routes additionally verify that the authenticated teacher is the assigned teacher on the relevant course before permitting the operation, providing object-level access control on top of the role-level check. This directly addresses OWASP API Security Top 10 A1 (Broken Object Level Authorisation), identifies in Section 2.3.6 as one of the most critical risks in API-based systems (OWASP,2023).
3.10 Authentication Flow
The sequence diagram below maps the chronological exchange of messages during the login process, from the initial form submission through to the issuance and storage of a JWT.

A deliberate decision was made to store the JWT in React’s AuthContext memory state rather than in the browser’s localStorage API. The localStorage API is accessible to any JavaScript executing on the page, meaning a successful Cross-Site Scripting attack could exfiltrate a token stored there and use it to impersonate the user in subsequent requests. Storing the token in component state means it does not survive a page refresh, which represents a minor usability trade-off but a meaningful reduction in the attack service for credential theft. This decision reflects the principle that security considerations take precedence over convenience where the two are in tension.
3.11 Security Design
The security architecture of the system is organised around the CIA Triad as discussed in Section 2.3.6, with each pillar translated into concrete implementation decisions addressing the specific vulnerabilities catalogued by OWASP (2021; 2023).
Confidentiality is maintained through three independent mechanisms. JWT authentication, implemented using the jsonwebtoken library, ensures that every protected route independently verifies the token on each incoming request without reliance on persistent server-side sessions. The authorize middleware enforces role-based access on every write operation and on sensitive read operations such as the audit log, directly addressing OWASP A01 (Broken Access Control), which is identified as the most critical vulnerability in the OWASP Top 10 (OWASP, 2021). For the material upload functionality, an additional object-level authorisation check verifies that the requesting teacher is the assigned teacher on the target course, addressing OWASP API Security A1 (Broken Object Level Authorisation). Passwords are hashed using Bcrypt with a cost factor of 12, rendering offline dictionary attacks computationally impractical by making the hash function intentionally slow. A rate limiter applies a ceiling of 100 requests per fifteen-minute window across all API routes, with a stricter ceiling of ten requests per fifteen-minute window on the authentication endpoint specifically, mitigating OWASP A07 (Identification and Authentication Failures).
Integrity is protected through layered defensive programming. The express-validator library validates and sanitises all request bodies at the route level before any database operation is attempted, guarding against OWASP A03 (Injection). Mongoose schemas apply a second independent layer of validation, including data type enforcement, maximum field lengths, regex pattern matching, and enumerated value constraints. File uploads are validated against a permitted list of file extensions and a maximum file size before being written to the server, preventing the upload endpoint from being used to store malicious executable files. Taken together, these controls mean that malformed or malicious input must bypass both route-level and schema-level validation before it could reach the database. React's JSX templating automatically escapes all rendered values, providing built-in protection against Cross-Site Scripting on the client side (Johns et al., 2008). The Helmet.js middleware sets a collection of protective HTTP response headers including X-Content-Type-Options, X-Frame-Options, and a Content Security Policy, reducing the attack surface at the transport layer.
Availability is supported through a global Express error handler that catches all unhandled exceptions and returns a structured JSON error response. This ensures that a single failing database operation or unexpected runtime error does not crash the server process. In development mode the error response includes the stack trace to assist debugging, whilst in production only a generic message is returned, preventing implementation details from being disclosed to potential attackers.

3.12 User Interface Design and Navigation
The interface follows a persistent sidebar navigation layout with a central content pane. This pattern is well established in administrative web applications and was selected to minimise navigation overhead, allowing users to move between sections without losing their position in the current view. The sidebar remains visible at all times on desktop and collapses to a hamburger menu on narrower screens, providing consistent orientation across device sizes.
Data entry is handled through modal overlay forms rather than separate pages. When an administrator initiates the creation of a new student record, a modal form appears over the current view, is submitted asynchronously, and the underlying data table refreshes to reflect the new record without a full page reload. This pattern keeps the user in context throughout the workflow and directly addresses the cognitive load concerns identified in Section 2.2.5, where navigation-heavy interfaces were linked to increased technostress among administrative staff (Tarafdar et al., 2007).
Teachers access a dedicated module view for each course to which they are assigned. Within this view, the interface presents two distinct areas. The first is a materials area where the teacher can upload course resources such as PDFs, presentation slides, and documents, and view or remove materials they have previously uploaded. The second is a grades area where the teacher can enter and review assessment results for students enrolled on that course. Grades entered through this view are written to the central Grade collection and are immediately visible to administrators on the main grades management page without any additional step required. The teacher's view is scoped strictly to their assigned courses, and no navigation option exists within the interface to access another teacher's module.
The navigation items displayed in the sidebar vary according to the authenticated user's role. Administrators see the full set of navigation options. Teachers see a reduced set that excludes user management and the audit log, and their course entries link directly to their module view rather than the general course management interface. Students see only their personal data views. This role-conditional rendering is handled in the Sidebar component using the user.role value stored in AuthContext, providing a clean interface that presents users only with the functions they are permitted to access.
3.13 Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion in Design
Several design decisions were made with accessibility and equity of access in mind, reflecting the EDI requirements discussed in Section 2.2.5.
The system is delivered as a web application rather than a desktop executable, meaning it requires no installation and can be accessed on any device with a modern browser. This removes the hardware dependency associated with legacy thick-client systems such as Capita SIMS and ensures that staff members using institutional computers, personal laptops, or shared workstations can all access the system without technical barriers.
The interface uses a high-contrast colour scheme with text and interactive elements sized to meet WCAG 2.2 Level AA contrast ratio requirements (W3C, 2024). All form fields carry descriptive labels rather than relying on placeholder text alone, which is an accessibility best practice as placeholder text disappears on input and is not reliably conveyed by screen reader software. All interactive elements maintain a minimum click target size of 44 by 44 pixels in line with WCAG 2.2 Success Criterion 2.5.8.
The material upload feature supports inclusive teaching practice by providing a centralised, authenticated location for teachers to share accessible versions of course resources, such as high-contrast documents or captioned slide decks, rather than distributing materials through inaccessible channels such as email attachments or external file-sharing services that may not be available to all students.
The student record schema includes a gender field with the enumerated options of male, female, other, and prefer_not_to_say, reflecting a commitment to inclusive data collection practices that do not compel students into a binary classification.

3.14 Chapter Summary
This chapter has established a comprehensive technical specification for the School Administration System. The MoSCoW prioritisation process produced a clearly bounded feature set for the MVP, grounded in the operational problems identified in the literature review. The database schema design, including the compound unique index on attendance records, the GDPR consent fields on student documents, and the course-scoped Material collection, reflects a deliberate effort to address data integrity, legal compliance, and access control at the structural level rather than leaving these concerns to application logic alone. The security design addresses the specific OWASP vulnerability categories most relevant to a data-intensive web application, with multiple independent controls applied to each of the CIA Triad pillars and object-level authorisation enforced on teacher-specific operations. The interface design prioritises usability and accessibility in line with the cognitive load and EDI considerations established in Chapter 2, with the teacher module view designed to integrate naturally into the existing administrative workflow rather than operating as a separate system. The following chapter describes how these design decisions were translated into working code.
References
Acosta-Vargas, P., Lujan-Mora, S. and Salvador-Ullauri, L. (2016) 'Evaluation of the web accessibility of higher-education websites', 2016 15th International Conference on Information Technology Based Higher Education and Training (ITHET), pp. 1-6. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ITHET.2016.7760704 .
Al-Emran, M., Mezhuyev, V. and Kamaludin, A. (2018) 'Technology Acceptance Model in M-learning context: A systematic review', Computers & Education, 125, pp. 389–412. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2018.06.022 .
Amoako-Gyampah, K. (2007) 'Perceived usefulness, user involvement and behavioral intention: an empirical study of ERP implementation', Computers in Human Behavior, 23(3), pp. 1232-1248. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2004.12.002.
Banks, A. and Porcello, E. (2020) Learning React: Modern Patterns for Developing Complex Web Interfaces. 2nd edn. O'Reilly Media. Available at: https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/learning-react-2nd/9781492071377/ .
Beck, K. et al. (2001) Manifesto for Agile Software Development. Agile Alliance. Available at: https://agilemanifesto.org/ .
Boehm, B. and Turner, R. (2003) Balancing Agility and Discipline: A Guide for the Perplexed. Addison-Wesley. Available at: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/861175 .
Boicea, A., Radulescu, F. and Agapie, L.I. (2012) 'Distributed Database Systems Comparison: SQL vs. NoSQL', 2012 International Conference on Information and Computer Networks, pp. 25-30. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICICN.2012.24.
Brewer, E. (2012) 'CAP twelve years later: How the "rules" have changed', Computer, 45(2), pp. 22-29. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2012.37 .
Brooke, J. (1996) 'SUS-A quick and dirty usability scale', Usability evaluation in industry, 189(194), pp. 4-7. Available at: https://uxpajournal.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/7/pdf/Brooke-1996-SUS.pdf .
Cavoukian, A. (2009) Privacy by Design: The 7 Foundational Principles. Information and Privacy Commissioner of Ontario. Available at: https://iapp.org/media/pdf/resource_center/pbd_implement_7found_principles.pdf Chitra, P. and Satapathy, R. (2017) 'Performance Analysis of REST-based Web Services in Node.js and Java', International Journal of Computer Applications, 162(10). Available at: https://doi.org/10.5120/ijca2017913341.
Date, C.J. (2004) An Introduction to Database Systems. 8th edn. Pearson. Available at: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/960248 .
Educause (2022) 2022 EDUCAUSE Horizon Report: Teaching and Learning Edition. Educause. Available at: https://library.educause.edu/resources/2022/4/2022-educause-horizon-report-teaching-and-learning-edition.
Fielding, R.T. (2000) Architectural Styles and the Design of Network-based Software Architectures. PhD Thesis. University of California, Irvine. Available at: https://ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/top.htm.
Fowler, M. (2003) Patterns of Enterprise Application Architecture. Addison-Wesley. Available at: https://martinfowler.com/books/eaa.html.
Fowler, M. (2015) Event-Driven Architecture. ThoughtWorks. Available at: https://martinfowler.com/articles/201701-event-driven.html.
Gackenheimer, C. and Mardan, A. (2015) Introduction to React. Apress. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-1245-5.
Garg, S.K. and Buyya, R. (2012) 'Green Cloud computing and Environmental Sustainability', Harnessing Green IT: Principles and Practices, pp. 315-340. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118305393.ch13.
Goetz, B. et al. (2006) Java Concurrency in Practice. Addison-Wesley. Available at: https://jcip.net/.
Han, J. et al. (2011) 'Survey on NoSQL database', 2011 6th international conference on pervasive computing and applications, pp. 363-366. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICPCA.2011.6106531.
Hasselbring, W. (2000) 'Information system integration', Communications of the ACM, 43(6), pp. 32-38. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1145/336512.336522.
Hodges, C. et al. (2020) 'The Difference Between Emergency Remote Teaching and Online Learning',...source.
Hoepman, J.H. (2014) 'Privacy design strategies', IFIP International Information Security Conference, pp. 446-459. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-43936-3_28 .
ICO (2024) Guide to the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). Information Commissioner's Office. Available at: https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/uk-gdpr-guidance-and-resources/.
ISO (2018) ISO 9241-11:2018 Ergonomics of human-system interaction — Part 11: Usability. International Organization for Standardization. Available at: https://www.iso.org/standard/63500.html.
Johns, M., Engelmann, B. and Posegga, J. (2008) 'XSSDS: server-side detection of cross-site scripting attacks', Proceedings of the 24th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, pp. 255-264. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACSAC.2008.20).
Kitchenham, B. (2004) Procedures for performing systematic reviews. Keele University Technical Report. Available at: https://www.elsevier.com/__data/promis_misc/525444systematicreviewsguide.pdf.
Kleppmann, M. (2017) Designing Data-Intensive Applications. O'Reilly Media. Available at: https://dataintensive.net/.
Kniberg, H. (2015) Scrum and XP from the Trenches. C4Media. Available at: https://www.infoq.com/minibooks/scrum-xp-from-the-trenches-2/.
Kruchten, P. (2003) The Rational Unified Process: An Introduction. Addison-Wesley. Available at: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/861175.
Kujala, S. et al. (2023) 'Usability of AI-based clinical decision support systems', JMIR Human Factors. Available at: https://humanfactors.jmir.org/2023/1/e43089 .
Laudon, K.C. and Laudon, J.P. (2020) Management Information Systems: Managing the Digital Firm. 16th edn. Pearson. Available at: https://www.pearson.com/en-us/subject-catalog/p/management-information-systems-managing-the-digital-firm/P200000003362.
Markus, M.L., Axline, S. and Petrie, D. (2000) 'Learning from adopters' experiences with ERP: problems encountered and success achieved', Journal of Information Technology, 15(4), pp. 245-265. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1080/02683960010009030.
Mell, P. and Grance, T. (2011) The NIST definition of cloud computing. National Institute of Standards and Technology. Available at: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-145.
Mesbah, A. and van Deursen, A. (2007) 'Migrating multi-page web applications to single-page AJAX interfaces', 11th European Conference on Software Maintenance and Reengineering, pp. 181-190. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/CSMR.2007.13.
Mikowski, M.S. and Taivalsaari, A. (2013) Single page web applications: JavaScript end-to-end. Manning Publications. Available at: https://www.manning.com/books/single-page-web-applications.
Murugesan, S. (2008) 'Harnessing green IT: Principles and practices', IT Professional, 10(1), pp. 24-33. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/MITP.2008.10.
Myers, G.J., Sandler, C. and Badgett, T. (2011) The art of software testing. John Wiley & Sons. Available at: https://www.wiley.com/en-us/The+Art+of+Software+Testing%2C+3rd+Edition-p-9781118031964.
Nielsen, J. (1993) Usability Engineering. Morgan Kaufmann. Available at: https://www.nngroup.com/books/usability-engineering/.
Norman, D.A. (1988) The Design of Everyday Things. Basic Books. Available at: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/57306.
Otwell, T. (2021) Laravel Documentation. Available at: https://laravel.com/docs.
OWASP (2021) OWASP Top 10:2021. Open Web Application Security Project. Available at: https://owasp.org/Top10/.
Panko, R.R. (2008) 'What We Know About Spreadsheet Errors', Journal of End User Computing. Available at: https://doi.org/10.4018/jgim.1998040102.
Peltier, J.W., Zhao, Y. and Schibrowsky, R.E. (2012) 'Technology adoption by small businesses: An exploratory study of the interrelationships of owner and environmental factors', International Small Business Journal. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1177/0266242611401762.
Pfleeger, C.P. and Pfleeger, S.L. (2006) Security in Computing. Prentice Hall. Available at: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/1204558.
Reenskaug, T. (1979) Models-Views-Controllers. Xerox PARC. Available at: https://heim.ifi.uio.no/~trygver/themes/mvc/mvc-index.html.
Rentrop, C. and Zimmermann, S. (2012) 'Shadow IT management and control of unofficial IT', IADIS International Conference Information Systems, pp. 98-105. Available at: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/2413550.2413564.
Ries, E. (2011) The Lean Startup. Crown Business. Available at: http://theleanstartup.com/.
Royce, W.W. (1970) 'Managing the development of large software systems', Proceedings of IEEE WESCON, pp. 328-338. Available at: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/41765.41801.
Schwaber, K. and Sutherland, J. (2020) The Scrum Guide. Scrum.org. Available at: https://scrumguides.org/.
Selwyn, N. (2020) Is Technology Good for Education?. Polity. Available at: https://politybooks.com/bookdetail/?isbn=9781509505876.
Silic, M. and Back, A. (2014) 'Shadow IT–A view from behind the curtain', Computers & Security, 45, pp. 274-283. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2014.08.001.
Sommerville, I. (2016) Software Engineering. 10th edn. Pearson. Available at: https://software-engineering-book.com/.
Szyperski, C. (2002) Component software: beyond object-oriented programming. Addison-Wesley. Available at: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/576082 .
Tajpour, A., Ibrahim, S. and Sharifi, M. (2011) 'SQL injection detection and prevention techniques', International Journal of Advancements in Computing Technology, 2(4), pp. 1-8. Available at: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/SQL-injection-detection-and-prevention-techniques-Tajpour-Ibrahim/96eb73bb444c9b3a011edee78907ba06385ed27a.
Tikkinen-Piri, C., Rohunen, A. and Markkula, J. (2018) 'EU General Data Protection Regulation: Changes and implications for personal data collecting companies', Computer Law & Security Review, 34(1), pp. 134-153. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clsr.2017.05.015.
Tilkov, S. and Vinoski, S. (2010) 'Node.js: Using JavaScript to Build High-Performance Network Programs', IEEE Internet Computing. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1109/MIC.2010.145.
Voigt, P. and Von dem Bussche, A. (2017) The EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). Springer. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-57959-7.
Weaver, D. et al. (2008) 'The impact of the LMS on the university', Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 24(1). Available at: https://doi.org/10.14742/ajet.1228.
Webster, J. and Watson, R.T. (2002) 'Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: Writing a literature review', MIS Quarterly, pp. xiii-xxiii. Available at: https://doi.org/10.2307/3250971.
Poon, P.L., Lau, M.F., Yu, Y.T. and Tang, S.F. (2024) 'Spreadsheet quality assurance: a literature review', Frontiers of Computer Science, 18(2), article 182203. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11704-023-2384-6
